Title: IP primer for biotech startups 
Date: 2018-01-15 2:10 PST
Modified: 2018-01-15 2:10 PST
Category: startup
Tags: startup, biotech, strategy, ip
Slug: ip-part-1 
Authors: Katie Planey
Summary: My learnings about IP after our first patent filing 

Note: I do not intend to provide a full primer on IP for a startup. 
But after having just wrapped up filing our first patent, there were some 
tips I picked up along the way I wish I had been told up front to save us 
time and legal fees (i.e. hours). I will try and continually add to 
this post or add additional posts on IP as time goes on.

I am *not* a lawyer.  Consult with a lawyer before taking any 
sort of legal action, including IP, for your company.

#Intellectual Property: A Love and Hate Relationship#

Intellectual property can be especially important for a startup, 
biotech or not. Investors like to hear that you have something 
in the "secret sauce" of your company that is legally defensible. 


The reality is that what your final patent looks like is pretty up 
in the air for a few years: you have one year from when you file a provisional to 
make a formal patent application, and then 
depending on whether you fast-track your patent or not (this basically comes 
down to paying more up-front fees to the USPTO), it could be several 
years before your patent is granted. It will look pretty different from what you 
filed, because the countries you file your patent in will provide strong feedback 
on how they think you need to edit your patent to make it truly innovative and 
specific enough to be a patent.


That being said, it's important to file IP early and often if you are in a very 
new space.  And what you put in those patent filings are the only "ammo" you have 
when debating with patent officers in different countries. So patents are a long-term 
view, but they matter.


##My knowledge of ip before starting Mantra Bio##
(I think it helps to provide on context on my pre-existing knowledge, so 
that someone who has never thought of IP before does not feel like they are 
supposed to be a pseudo-expert from just reading this article.)

Since I had planned to enter the biotech or digital health world for quite 
a while, the basics of IP were not lost on me before I became a co-Founder.  I 
had always been a bit interested in law (in fact, I considered getting a B.S./J.D. 
through Northwestern University, which basically admits you into law schools when 
you apply to college, if you apply to a special program in their engineering 
school.) The first hint I might not love being a lawyer was when I told my 
A.P. Biology teacher I was thinking of majoring in chemical engineering and then 
going into law. He said "So...are you going to work for an oil company?"  Not that 
he was quashing my dreams - but he clarified that A) chemical engineering might not 
lead me to the type of industries I was really interested in and B) law is fairly 
predictable in what you do with your degree.


But I still tried to beef up my IP knowledge bit by but during my formal years of 
education.  I did a monthlong biotech institute in Germany one summer in college 
(I was big on learning foreign languages in college and had studied German in 
high school. The program was mostly in English, but for me to enroll in the 
Institute was not totally left field.) I learned a lot about the regulatory and 
legal hurdles biotech companies face. So much, in fact, that I though 
"ehh biotech seems hard. And all that awaits you is an acquisition by a bigger player. 
Maybe medical devices?" I soon learned medical devices were tricky too, which then 
pushed me into software - biomedical informatics.  But after auditing a patent class 
a Stanford taught by Jeff Schox, I realize algorithms patents are pretty hard to 
both file, and defend.  So there is no free lunch, at least in medical startups!


By the time I took Stanford's Biodesign course at Stanford, there wasn't a ton of 
new information for me to glean from sitting in a broad overview course, but I learned 
more about how you want to file a provisional patent as quickly as possible, now that 
it is first to file in the U.S.  My PhD program at Stanford also emphasize this. 
Interestingly enough, I do not remember IP really being emphasized during my MBA 
program at Stanford I completed before the PhD. I think that's a bit of an oversight. 
Sure, you might not 100% understand the technical concepts your team might be putting 
into a patent, but they also might not really know the ropes about how to craft a strong 
patent. And lawyers are not domain experts, and are short on time - it really comes down 
to entrepreneurs rolling up their sleeves and filling in the gaps before they can hire an 
in-house full-time counsel (i.e. lawyer).


###Jeff Schox's patent lectures (free online)###
The class by Jeff Schox was useful. He posts his lectures for free and published 
a short book on IP for entrepreneurs also: http://schox.com/resources.  

##A patent is a balance between broad and specific##
Jeff's lectures 
helped me understand what actually makes an idea patentable.  It's really a continuum - 
you can describe your patent as a super broad concept (a system that predicts things!) 
to something that is way too specific (a support vector machine fit with one specific 
feature list using one setting of input parameters, used in only one application in 
your company.) 


If you go too specific, you basically just gave someone a "recipe" to implement your 
idea, but all they have to do is minorly tweak the "recipe". Someone is only legally 
infringing on your patent if they are doing ALL of your claims.  So if one of your 
claims states that you use a constant of 0.25 in your algorithm, if the next person 
uses a constant of 0.30, they probably wouldn't be infringing on your patent. Now, 
their implementation would not be patentable - because YOUR patent made their implementation 
pretty obvious. But now they can easy copy you without legal repercussion!


Likewise, if you go too broad, when you file your patent application, the patent 
officer will go "ummmm ya no.  You can't patent 'an algorithm to predict medical 
outcomes'. Nice try."

###How broad do you go?###
Filing a patent goes like this, as least in the U.S.: file a provisional as soon as 
you can verbalize the idea, and you can describe, in pretty deep detail, how at least 
one implementation of the idea is completed.  You do NOT need data, or an actual physical 
finished product.  Push for going a bit broad on the provisional, because you want it to 
contain any possible method or application you'd want to have be part of the patent in the 
future.  If the patent is for a device or a physical instrument, having up front data/results 
in your provisional can be more important (versus say a methods/algorithms patent).


As a small company, you will probably file broader, but fewer, patents.  Broader might 
equal less defensible, but you're cash-strapped. Facebook can file a new patent anytime they 
change the coefficient fits on a statistical model they use, resulting in lots of highly 
specific patents (not useful across lots of applications, but pretty easily defensible to prevent 
someone from implementing an exact version of said model.)


This provisional will not become public until you then file a formal application, up 
to one year later. So you could actually let the provisional "die" and it would never 
become public, or even be considered prior art (i.e. someone could file on your same 
idea and they would get the patent if you did not "convert" your provisional to a full 
application).  Each filing step costs a bit more; expect to shell out at least a couple hundred 
buckets for just the provisional. Lawyer fees can cost upwards of $10k per filing step.   


When you file the application, it's basically a refined and beefed-up version of your provisional. 
If you did not in your provisional, by now you should at least have some working examples and data 
and/or results.  You'll probably narrow your focus a bit on the applications, but still leave plenty of 
wiggle room for the patent officer to tell YOU where to cut down and narrow.  They are going to do it 
regardless, so don't take unnecessarily scissors to the patent yourself. Leave some cutting for the patent 
officer!


##Picking a lawyer?##

Picking a good IP lawyer is important, but unfortunately, it's not like a lawyer 
will magically wave their wand, take your idea and create an incredible patent. You 
can pick up the basic tips on your own if you're reasonably intelligent and are an expert 
in your subject matter. That is also who will be your patent agent - an expert (or 
someone at least deemed pretty knowledgeable) - in your subject matter.  In fact, 
you do not even need a lawyer to file IP.  But the lawyer can help you avoid lots of 
gotchas, has streamlined operations for filing, and a really good lawyer can help you 
think about your overall patent portfolio strategy.


For IP, picking a "big name" law firm is fine, but will probably cost you a lot, and 
it may be hard to estimate the up-front costs. There are many great boutique IP firms, 
some with a mix of lawyers and patent agents (an agent may not have a J.D. but has a technical degree 
usually and is well-versed in filing strong patents.) Many boutique firms charge you a flat 
fee for each patent filing step.  This is nice because the lawyer is not then "on the clock". 
You can email them with stupid questions and not get an unexpected bill a month later. 


I would say, do shop around. You can even have multiple lawyers comb over the same patent 
filing. Be careful about doing this within a month of the filing deadline, however (for 
a provisional, the deadline is whenever you want it to be - hopefully ASAP, and for an 
application, it is one year after the provisional was filed). Lawyers have different styles 
and different "templates" - basically boilerplate language they like to use. They scan documents 
very, very quickly - even if they are not paid hourly, the more documents they get through, the 
more they get paid. If another lawyer is changing wording, or, worse, references to tables or 
figures, this probably won't get caught.  And you want to avoid any "silly" mistakes that make 
a patent officer reviewing your patent have to do any extra work - i.e. you don't want to piss 
them off. 


##How much work is it to file?##
I'd say it was a solid three weeks of work to file a provisional that was 
algorithmic-based last year.  You have to, to the best of your ability, explain 
in detail all possible ways the idea could be implemented. For a algorithm, 
that's things like: what sort of data? what sort of measurement devices? what 
sort of machine learning models? You also need to provide context on why the 
invention is actually new and useful (i.e. important to society). It gets 
exhausting pretty quickly if you are the actual inventor.  It is several drafts of 
writing this all down, your lawyer taking a look, and then (hopefully, if they care 
and are conscientious), emailing you back and saying "look, I know what you are trying 
to say in paragraph 21, but as it stands right now, it's not clear how you'd actually 
fit the machine learning algorithm."


For an application filing, it was 4 weeks or more. This really depends on if you 
already created detailed examples for the patent as a product for some other task 
you have at work.  Because it is basically the level of detail of a research publication 
if you want to convince the patent officer you actually know what you are talking about 
and not just trying to patent an idea that is either extremely broad or an idea that you 
actually have no clue how to implement.


###What goes into a patent###
As noted above, whether you can do this at the provisional, or have to push it off for the 
filing, you should approach adding examples (plural - add more with tweaked implementations to 
show how the patent goes beyond just one very specific example) as if you were preparing to 
submit a research publication. Those "supplemental methods" from a publication are particularly important, 
as they spell out the guts of how you actually did your work, step by step.


The main difference is how you describe existing methods or 
work you built off of.  For each example, preface any descriptions or references with 
"In some implemenations" - e.g. "in some implemenations, the model used is a neural network." 
This helps avoid the patent officer claiming down the road that your invention is ONLY for a 
neural network, when you also know you could easily use a support vector machine model, etc. to achieve 
similar results.



####Existing work####
Do not cite existing publications; just explain in detail every single step 
you used to produce the example results. You do not want to give the patent officer the perception 
that what you are doing is not really novel. This seems weird (and a little stupid) to me, but 
there's awkward rituals around research publications too, just different. And do not say things like "this is commong knowlege" 
- you are basically cutting yourself down and giving the patent officer reason to be wary 
what you are proposing is not really new.


When you are an expert in your field, a small new "add on" to an exsiting method or device can 
seem small to you, but if it involved an "aha!" moment, or your think it's a creative solution for 
a problem you had, it's probably new enough to patent. Don't sell yourself short!  I always emphasize 
this to our team members who approach their inventions like some academic reviewer with a stick up 
their a** who is out to just make you feel like your work is inconsequential.  Bounce the idea 
of your team members, and explain even to non-technical folks why it may be important. The company 
can share the idea with your lawyer to get a rough idea if it's patentable; do not shut the idea 
down before you get outside feedback (well, keep the idea a private one, since you can't file an 
invention as easily, or at all, if you publicly share it).


####Tables and Figures####
Make sure tables and figures have a one-inch margin.  Systems figures are great, even 
if it's just arrows pointing between boxes, to describe an entire workflow. 


Try to use font 13 or larger on tables and figures because the patent officer must be 
after to read them clearly.  You can have color figures - that's fine.  And remember that 
for some country filings, you are charged by the page. So if you have a long list of features 
used to train a model, for example, or a long list of measurements from your medical device, 
try to have tables with multiple columns on one page to shorten the page length.
